During the 1980s, US production of small light aircraft declined dramatically; production of new piston-powered single-engine aircraft dropped 91% from 1979 to 1989. As a result, there is an active market for used aircraft of this category. The purpose of this assignment is to use data on this market to develop a model that can predict and explain the asking price of a particular model of aircraft: the Warrior, manufactured by Piper Aircraft. 

The Piper Warrior is a four-passenger airplane with either a 150- or 160-horsepower engine. Introduced in the mid 1970s, it is a modification of the earlier Piper Cherokee. What factors affect the price of a used Piper Warrior? Some factors might include the age of the airframe (i.e., the aircraft body, excluding instruments and engine), the number of hours the aircraft has been flown (a measure of wear on the engine, among other things), and the time since the engine has been overhauled or replaced. Older airplanes may require a new paint job; for an airplane this can cost several thousand dollars.

A Warrior can be equipped with a wide range of features that affect its price. These include radios and electronic navigational and piloting instruments, also called avionics. In new aircraft, the difference between airplanes equipped with basic avionics compared to one fully equipped with the latest high tech gadgets can easily exceed the cost of the aircraft itself. Two particular kinds of avionics that could represent considerable investments over the basic package are abbreviated DME (distance measuring equipment) and LORAN (long-range navigation based on satellite communication.

The data here were transcribed from an issue of Trade-A-Plane, a national publication advertising used aircraft for sale, in the early 1990s. The variables recorded include the year of the aircraft, TT (total flight time in hours), SMOH (hours since major overhaul), DME, LORAN, HP (engine horsepower), paint (new or recent paint job), and price. Not all information may be available for all aircraft. The variables DME, LORAN, and paint are categorical variables that indicate whether the corresponding item was mentioned as being present in the ad. The price is given in thousands of dollars.